.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-only
.TH GWPROXY 1 "July 2026" "gwproxy" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gwproxy \- fast multi-threaded TCP, SOCKS5, HTTP and HTTPS proxy for GNU/Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gwproxy
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gwproxy
(the GNU/Weeb Proxy) is a fast, multi-threaded TCP proxy for GNU/Linux. A
single instance can act as any combination of:
.IP \(bu 3
a plain TCP\-to\-TCP forwarder to a fixed
.BR \-\-target ;
.IP \(bu 3
a
.B SOCKS5
proxy (RFC 1928) with IPv4, IPv6 and domain\-name targets and optional
username/password authentication (RFC 1929);
.IP \(bu 3
an
.B HTTP
proxy supporting both CONNECT tunnelling and forwarding of ordinary
absolute\-form requests ("GET http://host/path"), with optional "Basic" proxy
authentication (RFC 7617);
.IP \(bu 3
an
.B HTTPS
proxy that terminates the client's TLS on the listener (see
.B TLS TERMINATION
below), when built with OpenSSL support;
.IP \(bu 3
a
.B transparent
proxy that recovers each connection's original destination from
.BR SO_ORIGINAL_DST .
.PP
SOCKS5 and HTTP can be enabled together on one listening port; the protocol is
auto\-detected per connection from the client's first bytes, and both share a
single credential store. When TLS termination is enabled, a TLS ClientHello is
likewise auto\-detected, so plaintext and TLS clients coexist on the same port.
.PP
gwproxy runs a configurable number of worker threads that each accept
connections through
.B SO_REUSEPORT
and drive I/O with either the
.B epoll
(default) or
.B io_uring
event loop. It recovers gracefully from file\-descriptor exhaustion
(EMFILE/ENFILE), caches DNS answers for hostname targets, and can mark its own
outgoing connections with
.BR SO_MARK .
.SH OPTIONS
Every boolean option takes an explicit
.B 0
or
.B 1
argument. Long options and their single\-letter equivalents are interchangeable.
.SS General
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a usage summary and exit.
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-event\-loop=\fIname\fR
Event loop to use:
.B epoll
or
.BR io_uring .
The
.B io_uring
loop is only available when gwproxy was built with io_uring support (see
.BR "AVAILABILITY" ).
Default:
.BR epoll .
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-bind=\fIaddr:port\fR
Address and port to listen on. IPv6 literals are written in brackets, e.g.
.BR [::1]:1080 " or " 0.0.0.0:8080 .
The default,
.BR [::]:1080 ,
listens on the dual\-stack IPv4/IPv6 wildcard.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-target=\fIaddr:port\fR
For plain TCP forwarding, the fixed destination every accepted connection is
proxied to. Ignored in SOCKS5/HTTP/transparent modes, where the destination
comes from the protocol or the socket.
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-nr\-workers=\fInr\fR
Number of worker threads, each with its own
.B SO_REUSEPORT
listener. Default:
.BR 4 .
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-protocol\-timeout=\fIsec\fR
Seconds allowed for a client to complete the SOCKS5/HTTP (and, if enabled, TLS)
handshake before the connection is dropped. Default:
.BR 10 .
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-connect\-timeout=\fIsec\fR
Seconds allowed to establish the connection to the target (or upstream proxy)
before giving up. Default:
.BR 5 .
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-pid\-file=\fIfile\fR
Write the process ID to
.IR file .
Not written by default.
.SS Proxy mode selection
.TP
.BR \-S ", " \-\-as\-socks5=\fI0|1\fR
Run as a SOCKS5 proxy. Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.BR \-H ", " \-\-as\-http=\fI0|1\fR
Run as an HTTP proxy (CONNECT and forwarding). Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-as\-transparent=\fI0|1\fR
Run as a transparent proxy, taking the target from
.B SO_ORIGINAL_DST
(see
.BR "TRANSPARENT PROXY" ).
Cannot be combined with
.B \-\-as\-socks5
or
.BR \-\-as\-http .
Default:
.BR 0 .
.PP
.RS
If none of the above is set and
.B \-\-target
is given, gwproxy is a plain TCP forwarder.
.B \-\-as\-socks5
and
.B \-\-as\-http
may be set together to serve both protocols on one port.
.RE
.SS Authentication
.TP
.BR \-A ", " \-\-auth\-file=\fIfile\fR
File of
.B username:password
credentials, one per line, shared by SOCKS5 (RFC 1929) and HTTP "Basic" (RFC
7617) authentication. When set, clients of either protocol must present valid
credentials. The file is watched and hot\-reloaded on change. Without it, no
authentication is required (see
.BR "AUTHENTICATION" ).
.SS TLS termination (HTTPS proxy)
These options require a build with OpenSSL support (see
.BR "AVAILABILITY" ).
.TP
.BR \-E ", " \-\-tls\-cert=\fIfile\fR
PEM certificate chain presented to TLS clients. Providing it (together with
.BR \-\-tls\-key )
enables TLS termination on the listener.
.TP
.BR \-Y ", " \-\-tls\-key=\fIfile\fR
PEM private key matching
.BR \-\-tls\-cert .
Both must be given together.
.SS DNS resolution
.TP
.BR \-Q ", " \-\-prefer\-ipv6=\fI0|1\fR
Prefer IPv6 addresses when resolving proxy hostname targets. Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.BR \-L ", " \-\-dns\-cache\-secs=\fIsec\fR
Cache proxy DNS answers for this many seconds.
.B 0
or negative disables caching. Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.BR \-W ", " \-\-nr\-dns\-workers=\fInr\fR
Number of DNS resolver worker threads. Default:
.BR 4 .
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-dns\-server=\fIaddr:port\fR
Upstream DNS server for the built\-in raw resolver (see
.BR \-\-raw\-dns ).
Requires a build with the new DNS resolver. Default:
.BR 1.1.1.1 .
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-raw\-dns=\fI0|1\fR
Use the built\-in raw DNS resolver for SOCKS5/HTTP hostname targets instead of
the system resolver. Requires a build with the new DNS resolver. Default:
.BR 0 .
.SS Upstream proxy chaining
.TP
.BR \-x ", " \-\-upstream\-socks5=\fIurl\fR
Route every outgoing connection through a next\-hop SOCKS5 proxy. The URL form
is
.BR socks5://[user:pass@]host:port ,
which resolves target hostnames locally, or
.BR socks5h://[user:pass@]host:port ,
which asks the upstream proxy to resolve them. Optional
.B user:pass
supplies username/password authentication to the upstream.
.SS Networking
.TP
.BR \-M ", " \-\-mark=\fInr\fR
Set
.B SO_MARK
(fwmark) on outgoing connections, for policy routing and iptables matching.
Requires
.BR CAP_NET_ADMIN .
.B 0
disables it. Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.BR \-T ", " \-\-target\-buf\-size=\fInr\fR
Size in bytes of the per\-connection buffer for target\(->client data. Default:
.BR 2048 .
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-client\-buf\-size=\fInr\fR
Size in bytes of the per\-connection buffer for client\(->target data. Default:
.BR 2048 .
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-tcp\-nodelay=\fI0|1\fR
Enable
.B TCP_NODELAY
on connections. Default:
.BR 1 .
.TP
.BR \-K ", " \-\-tcp\-quickack=\fI0|1\fR
Enable
.B TCP_QUICKACK
on connections. Default:
.BR 1 .
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-tcp\-keepalive=\fI0|1\fR
Enable
.B TCP
keepalive on connections. Default:
.BR 1 .
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-tcp\-keepidle=\fIsec\fR
.B TCP_KEEPIDLE
in seconds. Default:
.BR 60 .
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-tcp\-keepintvl=\fIsec\fR
.B TCP_KEEPINTVL
in seconds. Default:
.BR 10 .
.TP
.BR \-g ", " \-\-tcp\-keepcnt=\fInr\fR
.B TCP_KEEPCNT
probe count. Default:
.BR 5 .
.SS Logging
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-log\-level=\fIlevel\fR
Verbosity:
.B 0
none,
.B 1
error,
.B 2
warning,
.B 3
info,
.B 4
debug. Default:
.BR 3 .
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-log\-file=\fIfile\fR
Write logs to
.IR file .
Default:
.BR /dev/stdout .
.SH PROXY MODES
.SS Plain TCP forwarding
With no proxy mode selected and
.B \-\-target
set, every accepted connection is spliced to the fixed target address. This is
a straight byte forwarder with no protocol handling.
.SS SOCKS5
.RB ( \-\-as\-socks5=1 )
Implements the SOCKS5 CONNECT command (RFC 1928) for IPv4, IPv6 and
domain\-name (ATYP) targets. With
.B \-\-auth\-file
set, the username/password method (RFC 1929) is required; otherwise the
no\-authentication method is offered.
.SS HTTP
.RB ( \-\-as\-http=1 )
Handles two request styles on the same port:
.IP \(bu 3
.B CONNECT
requests, tunnelling arbitrary TCP (typically end\-to\-end TLS) to the named
host and port;
.IP \(bu 3
.B forwarding
of ordinary absolute\-form requests such as "GET http://host/path", which
gwproxy rewrites to origin form, fetches from the origin and relays back, one
request per connection.
.PP
With
.B \-\-auth\-file
set, "Basic" proxy authentication (RFC 7617) is required and a missing or wrong
credential is answered with "407 Proxy Authentication Required".
.SS Combined SOCKS5 + HTTP
Setting both
.B \-\-as\-socks5=1
and
.B \-\-as\-http=1
serves both protocols on the same listening port. The protocol is detected from
the client's first bytes, and both share the same credential store.
.SH TLS TERMINATION
When built with OpenSSL and started with
.B \-\-tls\-cert
and
.BR \-\-tls\-key ,
gwproxy can terminate a client's TLS session on its own listener (an "HTTPS
proxy"), then run the ordinary SOCKS5/HTTP logic on the decrypted stream. This
encrypts the client\(->proxy hop, protecting proxy credentials and, for cleartext
.B http://
targets, the request and URL.
.PP
TLS is applied per connection by auto\-detecting the first byte: a value of
.B 0x16
(a TLS ClientHello) starts a handshake, while SOCKS5, SOCKS4 and HTTP first
bytes do not, so
.B plaintext SOCKS5/HTTP clients keep working unchanged on the same port.
gwproxy advertises only the "http/1.1" ALPN protocol, cleanly downgrading an
HTTP/2\-preferring client. The OpenSSL engine is driven entirely through memory
BIOs and never touches the socket directly. TLS termination works on both the
epoll and io_uring event loops.
.PP
This is distinct from an HTTP
.B CONNECT
tunnel to an
.B https://
origin, which gwproxy blind\-tunnels end\-to\-end without terminating TLS, and
which needs no certificate.
.SH AUTHENTICATION
The credential file named by
.B \-\-auth\-file
holds one
.B username:password
entry per line. The same store backs SOCKS5 (RFC 1929) and HTTP "Basic" (RFC
7617) authentication; whenever it is configured, clients of either protocol
must authenticate. gwproxy watches the file and reloads it automatically when it
changes, so credentials can be updated without a restart.
.SH TRANSPARENT PROXY
.RB ( \-\-as\-transparent=1 )
Transparent mode takes each connection's original destination from the
.B SO_ORIGINAL_DST
socket option, so it must sit behind an iptables
.B REDIRECT
rule. To avoid a redirect loop, gwproxy's own outgoing connections can be marked
(with
.BR \-\-mark )
and excluded from the REDIRECT:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
gwproxy \-\-bind=127.0.0.1:1080 \-\-as\-transparent=1 \-\-mark=1
iptables \-t nat \-A OUTPUT \-p tcp \-\-dport 80 \-m mark ! \-\-mark 1 \\
    \-j REDIRECT \-\-to\-ports 1080
.EE
.RE
.PP
.B \-\-mark
requires
.BR CAP_NET_ADMIN ,
and installing the iptables rules requires the corresponding privileges;
both typically need root.
.SH UPSTREAM CHAINING
With
.BR \-\-upstream\-socks5 ,
every outgoing connection is made through a next\-hop SOCKS5 proxy rather than
directly. The
.B socks5://
scheme resolves target hostnames locally before connecting, while
.B socks5h://
defers name resolution to the upstream proxy. Credentials embedded in the URL
authenticate to the upstream.
.SH EVENT LOOPS
Each worker uses one event loop, selected with
.BR \-\-event\-loop .
.B epoll
is always available and is the default.
.B io_uring
is available only in builds configured with io_uring support and is selected at
run time. All proxy features, including TLS termination, work on both loops.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.BR SIGINT ", " SIGTERM
Begin a graceful shutdown: stop accepting new connections, let workers drain,
and exit.
.TP
.B SIGPIPE
Ignored, so a peer closing a connection cannot terminate the process.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B gwproxy
exits
.B 0
on a clean shutdown and non\-zero if the configuration is invalid or a fatal
runtime error occurs.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I auth\-file
Line\-oriented
.B username:password
credential store (see
.BR \-\-auth\-file ).
.TP
.I pid\-file
Process\-ID file written when
.B \-\-pid\-file
is given.
.SH EXAMPLES
Plain TCP forwarder,
.BR [::]:8080 " \(-> " 127.0.0.1:80 :
.RS 4
.EX
gwproxy \-\-bind='[::]:8080' \-\-target=127.0.0.1:80
.EE
.RE
.PP
SOCKS5 proxy with username/password authentication:
.RS 4
.EX
gwproxy \-\-bind='[::]:1080' \-\-as\-socks5=1 \-\-auth\-file=auth.txt
.EE
.RE
.PP
HTTP proxy (CONNECT and forwarding) on port 8080:
.RS 4
.EX
gwproxy \-\-bind='[::]:8080' \-\-as\-http=1
.EE
.RE
.PP
SOCKS5 and HTTP on the same port, sharing one credential file:
.RS 4
.EX
gwproxy \-\-bind='[::]:1080' \-\-as\-socks5=1 \-\-as\-http=1 \-\-auth\-file=auth.txt
.EE
.RE
.PP
HTTPS proxy terminating client TLS (plaintext clients still work on the same
port):
.RS 4
.EX
gwproxy \-\-bind='[::]:8080' \-\-as\-http=1 \-\-as\-socks5=1 \\
    \-\-tls\-cert=cert.pem \-\-tls\-key=key.pem
curl \-x https://127.0.0.1:8080 http://example.com/
.EE
.RE
.PP
Chain every outgoing connection through an upstream SOCKS5 proxy:
.RS 4
.EX
gwproxy \-\-bind='[::]:1080' \-\-as\-socks5=1 \\
    \-\-upstream\-socks5=socks5h://user:pass@1.2.3.4:1080
.EE
.RE
.PP
Use the io_uring event loop and set SO_MARK 100 on outgoing packets:
.RS 4
.EX
gwproxy \-\-bind='[::]:1080' \-\-as\-socks5=1 \-\-event\-loop=io_uring \-\-mark=100
.EE
.RE
.SH AVAILABILITY
Some features are enabled at build time by
.BR ./configure :
.IP \(bu 3
.B \-\-use\-io\-uring
builds the io_uring event loop, then selectable with
.BR \-\-event\-loop=io_uring .
.IP \(bu 3
.B \-\-use\-openssl
builds TLS termination; without it the
.B \-\-tls\-cert
and
.B \-\-tls\-key
options are absent.
.IP \(bu 3
.B \-\-use\-new\-dns\-resolver
builds the raw DNS resolver, enabling
.B \-\-raw\-dns
and
.BR \-\-dns\-server .
.PP
Options for features not compiled in are rejected. Run
.B ./configure \-\-help
for the full list.
.SH NOTES
.B \-\-mark
requires
.BR CAP_NET_ADMIN .
Transparent mode requires iptables REDIRECT rules, which typically need root.
Binding to a privileged port (< 1024) requires
.B CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE
or root.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR curl (1),
.BR iptables (8),
.BR io_uring (7),
.BR tcp (7),
.BR socket (7),
.BR capabilities (7)
.PP
Project home:
.UR https://github.com/GNUWeeb/gwproxy
.UE
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Send patches and bug reports to the GNU/Weeb Mailing List
<gwml@vger.gnuweeb.org>.
.SH AUTHORS
gwproxy is maintained by Ammar Faizi <ammarfaizi2@gnuweeb.org>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2025 Ammar Faizi <ammarfaizi2@gnuweeb.org>
.PP
This program is licensed under GPL\-2.0\-only.
